---
layout: post
title:  "The Building Blocks of Musical Taste"
date:   2017-07-10 19:45:32 +0530
categories: ["Meditations", "Introduction", "Multipart", "Conspiracy"]
---

# The Building Blocks of Musical Taste

## How did you form your musical tastes?

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*bNWHXIjPBQixpjpCpUabbQ.jpeg)

#### If you’re like most people your beliefs about the degree of autonomy involved in
forming these beliefs far outscales the reality.

### Belief

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*YtatESIcGFI1dKyB5dZmSg.jpeg)

The fairytale about how your musical tastes formed starts with an accepted norm.
This accepted norm is conditioned through your childhood experiences. Typically
it is made up of music that your parents listen to. Their tastes are in turn
influenced largely by mainstream pop radio — after all they have children, so
their time for hobbies is limited. Unless they greatly value discovering new
music, they’ll likely just listen to whatever everybody else is listening to.
Once you reach adolescence, or even your early teenage years, you’ll begin to
hear new music typically from your social circle. Depending on what kind of teen
you were (most likely rebellious in some way) this is going to be music that
values seemingly opposite principles than your “accepted norm” music. A couple
of typical genres would be emo, metal, hypersexualized pop, or anything else
that your local Top 40 station wouldn’t or couldn’t play. You likely view this
breaking apart from your “accepted norm” music as a huge step in your growth and
formation as an autonomous individual. Unwittingly you begin to form a value
system around this music. This value system consists of wider cultural values in
music such as “being in tune”, playing in rhythm (usually 4/4), and being loud,
and also your own values that emerge from the genres that you’re interested in
around this time. If you’re into metal for example, you likely begin to value
technical complexity in your music. If you’re into hypersexual pop, you likely
begin to value the appearance of your artists. Over the decades following this
you listen to a lot more music in related but not very disparate genres. High
school and college provide experiences for listening to a bevy of new music that
further reinforces your existing value system. To a large degree, these
aesthetic values about music also reflect and form your values as a human being.
This is a chicken-and-egg scenario, where it is impossible to tell which came
first and thus influenced that which came second.

### Reality

The reality of how your musical tastes formed is less of a fairytale. The
initial trajectory follows what’s outlined above — you form an “accepted norm”.
However, when you reach adolescence, you don’t boldly choose a new genre to help
form your identity. This genre is given to you.

**How old do you think the target demographic for record companies is 25?**

21?

18?

**The target demographic for record companies is 16.** Taking this into account,
we can reason that you didn’t choose a genre as a bold effort to rebel against
your parents, instead you were aggressively marketed to by the record companies
so that you would buy into whatever subculture they had manufactured. Not only
did you buy into this subculture, but you bought into its aesthetic, and human
value system.

Instead of a second revelation occurring in high school or college, you instead
continued to listen to related artists and bands. When Spotify came on the
scene, this indoctrination continued through the Discover Weekly playlist. You
were put in a veritable echo chamber of the beliefs that your formed in
adolescence. This would be seen as juvenile, and even creepy in another domain
such as political opinion, or film, but for some reason it’s rarely questioned
in music.

Music is not merely an arrangement of consonant and dissonant tones and noises.
It is not just a structure of rhythmic beats.

Music is a mind altering drug. It is the abstract embodiment of our value
systems. It lets us feel, on an experiential level, the relationships between
things external and internal. We can feel these relationships even if we listen
to music on a purely emotional level. They are concepts that can be thought
about, but are felt whether by ones own volition or not. Music programs the
mind.

*Stay tuned for the next post where I’ll write about how to tailor your musical
values to discover new tunes that will help your mind grow.*
