---
layout: post
title:  "Judging New Music: Criteria"
date:   2017-07-05 19:45:31 +0530
categories: ["Meditations", "Multipart", "Conspiracy"]
---

There are two dangerous extremes one can cling to while judging new music —
having a constrained set of values by which one judges music, or having an
overly liberal way of judging music.

#### Constrained Criteria

Those with a constrained set of musical values are the easiest to spot because
they are usually the loudest and most visible. They are dedicated to a single
genre, or maybe a couple of genres, and they are ready to defend the musical
values that make up these genres to the death. Some examples:

* Classical music elitists
* Metalheads
* Ravers
* Indie enthusiasts
* Jazz enthusiasts
* Hipsters of most varieties

#### Overly Liberal Criteria

Those with overly liberal criteria are trickier to spot. They fall into two
subcategories — the apathetic and the repressed. Apathetic listeners simply
don’t care about what kind of music they listen to. They claim to “like
everything”. I’m allowing for their theoretical existence in this writing, but I
have never actually met someone that falls into this category. Repressed
listeners are typically found in academia — usually in music or music-related
programs. The repressed listener actually loves music intensely. They are
usually a devotee of a genre that is frowned upon in their area of study. Due to
this peer pressure to conform, and to embrace the types of music supported by
the relatively homogenous value system around them, they repress this desire to
listen, research, and talk about the genre like like, typically deeming it
“non-academic”. The repressed listener then begins to play the “my musical
tastes are more egalitarian than yours” game, essentially virtue-signaling to
their peers that they have reached some higher plane of musical understanding
and thus have no time for mortal things such as passion. The repressed listener
is best avoided.

#### An inquiry into musical values

I propose a middle path between strong taste, and openmindedness instead. How
should one go about this process?

#### What type of listener are you?

Think about the types of music you listen to, and types of music your friends
listen to. What listener archetype do you feel you identify with the most? You
don’t have to pick one, but try and figure out if you lean more towards having a
constrained set of criteria, or an overly liberal one.

#### What are your “safe genres”?

Take a few minutes and look at the music on your phone, or your recently played
tracks on Spotify/Apple Music/etc. What is the predominant genre represented by
this music? What are the top three genres?

#### Value forming and expansion exercises

If you’re overly conservative in your musical values do the following: go back
to your list of “safe genres”, and find a tangentially related genre to one of
them. Find an event calendar for the nearest large city, and find a concert
where this tangentially related genre of music will be featured, i.e. if you are
into hip-hop, you might look for a spoken word event. While you’re at this
event, have brief conversations with at least three strangers. Getting a vibe
for the average person at one of these events could offer powerful insight into
the values and criteria by which the music is judged by.

If your musical criteria is overly liberal, do this same exercise. After the
event has ended, jot down five things that you enjoyed about the experience, and
five things that you did not.

After a few repetitions of these exercises, you’ll start to see trends emerge.
Naturally, you will start to gravitate towards certain genres and be repelled by
others. When this begins to happen, stay mindful and take note of what values
you like about the music that you are being pulled to, and what values you
dislike about the music that is repelling you.

Get out there and hear some new music. Happy listening!
